over 100 million years ago
dinosaurs were all the rage and mammals
cowered in their huge shadow
but then there was a badger-like
creature that lived in asia at the time
where most mammals were small and quick
to get away from trouble
the rep anonymous was way bigger
it was the size of a large dog
researchers think this creature wasn't
too fast
because it had short legs but it was
surely a carnivore
and surprisingly there were dinosaur
remains
found in its fossilized belly turns out
mammals were already evolving to rival
the huge reptiles
and repe nomamos was one of the first to
hunt them down
instead of being hunted it's not clear
yet
if the giant badger was a hunter or a
scavenger
but it was big and bulky enough to be
both
dinos beware
then there was the opania you could
easily carry it around with you
but whether you'd want to is another
matter because it had not one
not two but five eyes
the opa binia looked so strange that
when scientists reconstructed it
in 1972 they first burst out laughing
the opania had a trunk-like mouth which
it used to fish around the mud for food
but because it didn't have teeth it
probably
only ate soft food
the terror bird a large carnivorous bird
that looked like it stepped out of a
horror movie
it had a sharp beak that had the force
of a sledgehammer
which wouldn't have been good news for
its prey
the terror bird was one of the most
dangerous predators in south america
during its time
it was a flightless bird but it was also
a very fast runner
the only way to outsmart it was to take
sharp turns while running
for these birds could only run fast in a
straight line
the megalodon was the largest fish that
ever lived
female megs were nearly twice as large
as the males
its name megalodon means big teeth
and no surprise its teeth were three
times larger
than those of the great white shark the
megalodon appeared after the dinosaurs
became extinct
now it's extinct too but when it was
alive
it seemed to have lived in nearly all
parts of the world
except antarctica if you thought
modern day piranhas are bad you should
have seen the mega piranha that lived in
south america
millions of years ago if you compare its
size to a dog's
it was as long as a golden retriever and
weighed as much as an adult
cocker spaniel the mega piranha could
exert a force
up to 50 times its own weight pound for
pound
that's more powerful than even the
t-rex's bite
there were lions in north america that
disappeared
around 13 000 years ago this was around
the same time that
mammoths went extinct these lions were
almost 25
larger than those of today fossils of
these ancient lions
were discovered in the la brea tar pits
in los angeles
along with many other interesting
creatures
an armored fish the dunkleosteus
didn't have teeth but that didn't matter
because it had razor sharp
bone protrusions that were like a pair
of shears
it could snatch its prey by opening and
closing its mouth
at a speed of 50 milliseconds
some scientists believe the dunkleosteus
swam sideways like an eel
fossils of this fish can be seen in many
museums
all over the world the titanic boa
was the largest snake ever discovered
this
giant crushing machine was even able to
consume
a crocodile it lived 60 million years
ago
in the tropical forests of south america
and looked
more like a boa constrictor but acted
like a water dwelling anaconda
although the titanoboa is now extinct
people still find it fascinating there
is a full-scale replica of it
in midtown manhattan the tully monster
lived 300 million years ago but
researchers
learned about its existence only about
60 years ago
from what we know it had a soft
torpedo-shaped body
and vertical fins the tully monster was
one of the most bizarre creatures
ever and scientists just couldn't figure
out what it was
first they thought it was a type of worm
then
a sort of squid now they say it's
closest to
a lamprey which is a parasitic fish
the largest member of the canine family
was
the epision which is now extinct
the term epision means more than a dog
and it certainly was it was as long
as a lion and weighed just as much and
its huge skull
had a lion-like shape to it the epicyon
may have
either gone after prey or scavenged for
food
but they ate everything from rhinos to
horses
there was nothing to smile about if you
ever came across a smilodon
but don't worry it went extinct many
years ago
this saber-toothed tiger lived in the
forests of north and south america
until ten thousand years ago the
smilodon had
impressive upper body strength which
helped it wrestle
its prey to the ground this was bad news
for all the mammals in its area
because it was especially fond of having
bison
and camel for breakfast
the jay kilopterus was a giant scorpion
that lived in germany
400 million years ago it was longer than
two yardsticks laid end to end
and it was the largest arthropod that
was ever discovered
its fossilized claw found recently was
longer than a loaf of bread
the jaycallopterus was called a sea
scorpion
but it preferred to live in rivers and
lakes it was not a picky eater
and it ate fish and other aquatic
animals smaller than itself
even the smaller ones of its own kind
weren't safe
when the larger ones were around
[Music]
one of the biggest flying insects of all
time
was the mega neuropsys it looked like a
dragonfly
but its wingspan was unbelievably wide
these insects probably grew so big
because
there was more oxygen in the atmosphere
then which fueled their growth
mega neuropsys lived in north america in
the prehistoric era
it was so big and hungry that its diet
included small lizards and young
amphibians
to get rid of this creature only a
swatter larger than
a table would be of any use and a piece
of its wing
is still preserved at the harvard museum
of natural history
whales were once land dwellers and moved
to water
only 50 million years ago the
bacillusaurus
despite its name was not a dinosaur but
one of the first
marine species and it was much larger
than
other early whales it was longer than a
four-story building
had a gigantic head and a bite to rival
the t-rex
fossils of some smaller whales carry the
teeth marks of the basilasaurus
this is not surprising since it was one
of the top predators of its time
it ate nearly anything but its favorite
food
seemed to be dolphin-like creatures
if you thought grizzly bears were bad
you should have seen the arctoda
seamus this short-faced bear could run
really fast faster than wild horses and
antelopes
one study suggests this bear consumed
more meat in a day
than most people would eat in a year
it used to dwell all across north
america until 11
000 years ago it used its enormous size
to intimidate smaller predators
such as saber-toothed cats american
lions
and dire wolves
if you don't like rats then the joseph
fortigacia
will be your worst nightmare the only
thing worse than its name
was its size in fact this rodent was as
large as the bull
of today the giant rat lived in south
america
around 3 million years ago it had
fearsome front teeth
that enabled it to ward off predators it
also made full use of those cutters
to crop grass and other vegetation
the first bird was the archaeopteryx
some say was the missing link between
birds and dinosaurs
it was actually very small no bigger
than a raven
this animal had very sharp teeth three
fingers with claws
and a long bony tail
the glyptodon was one of the armadillos
ancient relatives
heavily armored with a round bony shell
it looked like a turtle
but was as large as a car it was an
herbivore
but it had a flexible bony tail which it
used to defend itself from predators
and to fight its own kind
the neurolagis rex was the t-rex of
rabbits
and it was nothing like the cute bunnies
we're used to
for one thing it was massive weighing
six times as much as the european rabbit
of today
it ate roots and yams and lived in an
idyllic
insular environment that had no natural
predators
perhaps that's why it could grow so huge